Objective: Maximize the number of members over casual users.

To start this project I was given 6 months of data to analyze to try and answer Lily Moreno’s questions. 
How can we maximize the number of members for our company Cyclic? After downloading the data I uploaded each individual 
month into my R programming studio and ensured that I had the correct packages installed to enable advanced functions in R.

After this step, I jumped into organizing and cleaning my data.

Some of these months had different or extra column names so I had to discard a few statistics that were no longer being tracked
and to standardize the names of a few columns too. Once all the column names were standardized
I ensured that each data type was standardized as well because if they were not standardized the files
would not be able to merge properly. After all of my organization was complete I was able to take all 6 months of data
and combine them into one large datasheet. 

With some quick querying, I was able to learn that there was a total of 2,700,399 unique users within this 6 month period.
Of those 2,700,399 users, 711,238 of them were casual riders, meaning they do not have an active subscription, and 1,989,161
of these riders were active subscribers. Over to the right is a pie chart showing the percentage of subscribers
to casual riders. With 26.4% of the riders being casual, it is important to try and find a trend with how these riders
interact with the service to see if we can try and convince them to become active subscribers.



Theory:

My first inclination is to consider the fact that Cyclic is based out of the city of Chicago in Illinois. 
Chicago is a huge tourist destination and it makes sense to look up local travel data to see how many visitors
the city of Chicago receives on a yearly basis and to compare it to the residents of Chicago. With some quick searching, 
it appears that Chicago welcomed over 60 million visitors in the year that this data was gathered.

Another quick search revealed that the city of Chicago only has a population of 8,862,000.

Chicago has almost 6 times as many visitors as residents. Because of this fact,
I would like to work off of the theory that a lot of our more casual riders could be tourists.

To back up this claim I looked at the usage statistics to figure out which days of the week were the most popular for Cyclic
and what relationship each day of the week had with both casual users and active subscribers. 
What I ended up finding was that active subscribers were actually much more likely to use our services during the week 
Monday-Friday while the casual riders were almost twice as likely to ride their bikes during the weekends. 
Even though casual riders are only 26.4% of users their usage was still similar to active subscribers on the weekends.



Deeper Test:

I wanted to investigate a little further into my theory because although it is evident that casual Cyclic
users are more common on the weekends it does not necessarily mean that most of our casual riders are tourists. 
In order to dive deeper I decided to investigate the length of each trip on each day of the week and to again separate
the users by active subscribers and casual users.

The data on the right indicates heavily that the trip duration during the week for our paid subscribers 
is highly consistent and short compared to the sporadic and long rides that our casual users are regularly taking. 
Additionally, the peak time for subscribed riders is at 8:15 am and 5:15 pm. These times correlate closely with the hours
of your average 9-5 job.

These facts could definitely indicate that our subscribed users are using our services to get to and from work every day
while our casual users could be using our services to enjoy their time touring the town. 




Suggestions:

wanted to investigate a little further into my theory because although it is evident that casual Cyclic users
are more common on the weekends it does not necessarily mean that most of our casual riders are tourists. 
In order to dive deeper I decided to investigate the length of each trip on each day of the week and to again separate 
the users by active subscribers and casual users.

The data on the right indicates heavily that the trip duration during the week for our paid subscribers
is highly consistent and short compared to the sporadic and long rides that our casual users are regularly taking.
Additionally, the peak time for subscribed riders is at 8:15 am and 5:15 pm. These times correlate closely with the hours
of your average 9-5 job.

These facts could definitely indicate that our subscribed users are using our services to get to and from work every day
while our casual users could be using our services to enjoy their time touring the town. 



For Tourists:

For the casual rider or tourist visiting the city of Chicago. 
Cyclic could enhance its subscription options to allow for more flexibility for its users. 
As it stands right now there are only single rides and single-day passes before it jumps to an entire year subscription.
This commitment jump is very large and could be intimidating for some users. 
If Cyclic were to add a monthly subscription service it could become more appealing to the general population. 
If a tourist were going to visit Chicago for a week it would certainly be cheaper to subscribe for one month
than to rent a bike every single day. Cyclic could even open up the option for a weekly subscription service.



For Locals:

For the residents of Chicago. Currently, only 1,989,161 users are active subscribers. 
This is less than 25% of the population of Chicago. There is a huge potential for additional users and subscribers
in this population and when you pull statistics from the Chicago Transit website
“CTA Facts at a Glance - CTA (transitchicago.com)” shows that there are over 500 million trips annually on
the Chicago public transport systems. This is a huge opportunity for Cyclic. 

Based on the riding habits of the subscribers it appears that each subscriber uses their
Cyclic membership for less than 15 minutes per session and they use them to get to and from work.
It could be a very good idea to create a subscription pass that is slightly cheaper but only includes
weekdays and not weekends. This approach could prove enticing to those users who just want to use Cyclic’s
services for work



Final Thoughts:

The problem I see with opening too many subscription options could be
decision fatigue for each user so it would be important to balance subscription options to around 3 or 4 options.

Options could be a great help but only changing the available options isn’t going to get anyone’s attention
it will be important to run advertisement campaigns around the city to ensure that the local residents as well
as the incoming tourists are aware of the possibility of traveling with Cyclic. For physical advertisements,
I would encourage Cyclic to purchase signs or posters at the airports, train stations, and bus stations to 
attempt to sway the public away from using the public transportation system.

For social media advertisement, I would encourage Cyclic to Host or sponsor local bike races or weekend exercise groups 
for subscribers. This could be a fantastic way to retain active subscribers and encourage new local users. 
If the Cyclic social media groups actively advertise and make these events fun and exciting the growth could be phenomenal.

No matter how Cyclic is advertised keeping Cyclic perceived as the healthier 
and a more convenient option of transportation will be key. 

To keep the service advertised and convenient I would encourage Cyclic to place its bike stations around bus stops,
train stations, as well as popular tourist destinations. It’s free advertisement and makes Cyclic accessible to all.

Chicago is a city teeming with life. It has close to 9 million residents and over 60 million annual visitors.
If more people know about Cyclic as a safe, healthy, and convenient option,
and if the subscription options are flexible enough for the average user then the subscription userbase
will be open to the opportunity of expansion well beyond where Cyclic is currently at. 


